NEP: add NEP 56 on array API standard support in main namespace (#25542)
numpy/numpy: doc/neps/nep-0056-array-api-main-namespace.rst

=============================================================
NEP 56 — Array API standard support in NumPy's main namespace
=============================================================

:Author: Ralf Gommers <ralf.gommers@gmail.com>
:Author: Mateusz Sokół <msokol@quansight.com>
:Author: Nathan Goldbaum <ngoldbaum@quansight.com>
:Status: Draft
:Type: Standards Track
:Created: 2023-12-19
:Resolution: TODO mailing list link

Abstract
--------

This NEP proposes adding full support for the 2022.12 version of the array API

> standard in NumPy's main namespace for the 2.0 release.

Author: done - please have another look

Motivation and scope
--------------------

.. note::

    The main changes proposed in this NEP were presented in the NumPy 2.0
    Developer Meeting in April 2023 (see `here
    <https://github.com/numpy/archive/blob/main/2.0_developer_meeting/NumPy_2.0_devmeeting_array_API_adoption.pdf>`__

>     for presentations from that meeting) and given a thumbs up there. The

Author: >  (I explicitly did not give a thumbs-up for the type promotion changes in that meeting).

I'm not sure what you mean exactly, since type promotion changes are basically NEP 50. Can you clarify?

>     for presentations from that meeting) and given a thumbs up there. The

Author: Not yet, but I will (a few more substantial updates to make). I never considered that a main change, but since it's going to be removed from this NEP I think we're good for this paragraph.

positional-only and keyword-only is a good idea for functions added to NumPy in
the future, but will not be done for existing functions since each such change
is a backwards compatibility break and it's not necessary for writing code that
is portable across libraries supporting the standard. An additional reason to
apply those design rules to all functions in the main namespace now is that it
then becomes much easier to deal with potential standardization of new
functions already present in NumPy - those could otherwise be blocked or forced
to use alternative function names due to the need for backwards compatibility.

It is important that new functions added to the main namespace integrate well
with the rest of NumPy. So they should for example follow broadcasting and
other rules as expected, and work with all NumPy's dtypes rather than only the
ones in the standard. The same goes for backwards-incompatible changes (e.g.,
linear algebra functions need to all support batching in the same way, and
consider the last two axes as matrices). As a result, NumPy should become more
rather than less consistent.

We'll note that one remaining incompatibility will be that NumPy is returning

> array scalars rather than 0-D arrays in most cases where the standard, and

Author: I don't think it does. E.g., from https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/arrays.scalars.html#scalars: _"Array scalars have the same attributes and methods as `ndarrays`. This allows one to treat items of an array partly on the same footing as arrays, smoothing out rough edges that result when mixing scalar and array operations."_

There is no special name for 0-D arrays AFAIK.

> array scalars rather than 0-D arrays in most cases where the standard, and

Reviewer: Hah, learned something new!

other array libraries, return 0-D arrays (e.g., indexing and reductions). There
have been multiple discussions over the past year about the feasibility of
removing array scalars from NumPy, or at least no longer returning them by
default. However, this would be a large effort with some uncertainty about
technical risks and impact of the change, and no one has taken it on. Given
that array scalars implement a mostly array-compatible interface, this doesn't

> seem like the highest-prio item regarding array API standard compatibility.

Author: https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/array_object.html already contains such a note:

<img width="565" alt="image" src="https://github.com/numpy/numpy/assets/98330/3e7d539c-d8ba-463a-927e-e622beeb7fbb">

Here are what we see as the main expected benefits and costs of the complete
set of proposed changes:

Benefits:

> - It will remove the "having to make a choice between the NumPy API and the
>   Array API" issue for other libraries,

Reviewer 2: For consistency
```suggestion
- It will remove the "having to make a choice between the NumPy API and the
  array API" issue for other libraries,
```

>   Array API" issue for other libraries,

Reviewer 2: I believe it is meant to be none of those options. Rather, for other _array-provider_ libraries, like CuPy and PyTorch, when they are  looking to implement new functionality, they have often followed NumPy, diverging only where they see benefits (CuPy follows NumPy more closely of course).

Now that we have the array API (still in early stages), these array-provider libraries don't really know whether following the NumPy API or the array API will be better for them (are differences going to persist? which will allow for better interoperability? which will make backwards compatibility easier?).

If NumPy conforms to the array API, these conflicts will disappear.

>   Array API" issue for other libraries,

Author: I meant both for producers and consumers, so roughly @seberg's second and third bullets and what Lucas said. But his first bullet is also a benefit. So all of these are good, except for `import torch as np` - that's probably not something we should encourage:)

Will try to rephrase.

- The array API standard tends to have more consistent behavior than NumPy
  itself has (in cases where there are differences between the two, see for
  example the `linear algebra design principles <https://data-apis.org/array-api/2022.12/extensions/linear_algebra_functions.html#design-principles>`__
  and `data-dependent output shapes page <https://data-apis.org/array-api/2022.12/design_topics/data_dependent_output_shapes.html>`__

>   in the standard),

Author: adopted the suggestion to move this down, and extended this Benefits section based on another comment.

- Easier for CuPy, JAX, PyTorch, Dask, Numba, and other such libraries and
  compilers to fully match or support NumPy,
- A few new features that have benefits independent of the standard: adding
  ``matrix_transpose`` and ``ndarray.mT``, adding ``vecdot``, introducing
  ``matrix_norm``/``vector_norm`` (they can be made gufuncs, vecdot already has
  a PR making it one),

Costs:

- A number of backwards compatibility breaks (mostly minor, see the Backwards
  compatibility section further down),
- Expanding the size of the main namespace with about ~20 aliases (e.g.,
  ``acos`` & co. with C99 names aliasing ``arccos`` & co.).

> Overall we believe that the benefits significantly outweigh the gains - and are
> permanent, while the costs are largely temporary. In particular, the benefits

Reviewer 2: Typo
```suggestion
Overall we believe that the benefits significantly outweigh the costs - and are
permanent, while the costs are largely temporary. In particular, the benefits
```

to array libraries and compilers that want to achieve compatibility with NumPy

> are significant. And as a result, the long-term benefits for the PyData (or
> scientific Python) ecosystem as a whole - because of downstream libraries being
> able to support multiple array libraries as easily as possible - are
> significant too. The number of breaking changes needed is fairly limited, and

Reviewer 2: opinion: I'd use slightly weaker wording here, as reaching the "as easily as possible" point will require slightly more than just array API adoption.
```suggestion
are significant. And as a result, the long-term benefits for the PyData (or
scientific Python) ecosystem as a whole - because of downstream libraries being
able to support multiple array libraries much more easily - are
significant too. The number of breaking changes needed is fairly limited, and
```

the impact of those changes seems modest. Not painless, but smaller than the

> impact of other breaking changes in NumPy 2.0, and a price worth paying.

Author: sure, done.

In scope for this NEP are:

> - Changes to NumPy's Python API needed to support the 2022.12 version of the array API standard,

Reviewer 2: I think we should be explicit about whether the `linalg` and `fft` extensions are included here.

- Changes in the behavior of existing NumPy functions not (or not yet) present in the array API standard, to align with key design principles of the standard.

Out of scope for this NEP are:

- Other changes to NumPy's Python API unrelated to the array API standard,
- Changes to NumPy's C API.

This NEP will supersede the following NEPs:

- :ref:`NEP30` (never implemented)
- :ref:`NEP31` (never implemented)
- :ref:`NEP37` (never implemented; the ``__array_module__`` idea is basically
  the same as ``__array_namespace__``)
- :ref:`NEP47` (implemented with an experimental label in ``numpy.array_api``,

>   will be removed)

Author: It seems relevant to me to briefly mention these here - it shows they're related and that a _lot_ of effort went into this topic over the years.

Re NEP 30: I think we don't want that anymore. The whole `__duckarray__` idea revolved around array consumer libraries using `np.asarray` on their inputs, and we're already replacing that by checking for `__array_namespace__` and letting the input array object return a different namespace. I'll defer to @shoyer here though, let's see what he thinks.

>   will be removed)

Author: Stephan replied on the mailing list [here](https://mail.python.org/archives/list/numpy-discussion@python.org/message/Z6AA5CL47NHBNEPTFWYOTSUVSRDGHYPN/), in favor of superseding the other NEPs. For NEP 30 he's the author, and for the authors it's more clear-cut. So I would like to resolve this comment and keep things as they are @seberg.

>   will be removed)

Reviewer 3: Really, I was always OK with keeping it!  Just felt it could be a good option to mark it there and not have to argue about it here.

        dist = xp.asarray(cdist(obs, code_book))
        code = xp.argmin(dist, axis=1)
        min_dist = xp.min(dist, axis=1)
        return code, min_dist

It mostly looks like normal NumPy code, but will run with for example PyTorch
tensors as input and then return PyTorch tensors. There is a lot more to this
story of course then this basic example. These blog posts on scikit-learn [1]_
and SciPy's [2]_ experiences and impact (large performance gains in some cases
- ``LinearDiscriminantAnalysis.fit`` showed ~28x gain with PyTorch on GPU vs.
NumPy) paint a more complete picture.

For end users who are using NumPy directly, little changes aside from there
being fewer differences between NumPy and other libraries they may want to use
as well. This shortens their learning curve and makes it easier to switch
between NumPy and PyTorch/JAX/CuPy. In addition, they should benefit from
array-consuming libraries starting to support multiple array libraries, making
their experience of using a stack of Python packages for scientific computing
or data science more seamless.

Finally, for authors of other array libraries as well as tools like Numba,

> array API standard support should save them time. The design rules ([3]_), and

Author: That's not what I meant here. What is meant is exactly how it's written "The design rules ...". Numba is always going to want to target the whole NumPy API (at least the whole main namespace and other main modules), so I don't think the suggested edit works.

> array API standard support should save them time. The design rules ([3]_), and

Author: > In that case maybe say: API improvements which align NumPy with the array API will also save time?

Okay, adopted this pretty much verbatim. So I'll resolve the comment.

in some cases new APIs like the ``unique_*`` ones, are easier to implement on
GPU and for JIT compilers as a result of more predictable behavior.

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this is a bit too speculative or big-picture, but I think a comment about the potential impact on new (in the sense of not done before with any array library) functionality - only needing to have 1 array-agnostic implementation, rather than 5+ similar-but-incompatible implementations for each array library ecosystem - wouldn't be out of place while we are talking about consumer libraries.

Author: If you don't mind, I'd like to leave this as is, since it's described in the array API standard language, in NEP 47, and in blog posts, talks, etc. - I'm running short on time for 2.0, and there's only so many times I can rewrite the same abstract point. NEP 47 has for example:

_For a longer discussion on the purpose of the array API standard we refer to the [Purpose and Scope section of the array API standard](https://data-apis.github.io/array-api/latest/purpose_and_scope.html) and the two blog posts announcing the formation of the Consortium [[1]](file:///home/rgommers/code/numpy/doc/neps/_build/html/nep-0047-array-api-standard.html#id6) and the release of the first draft version of the standard for community review [[2]](file:///home/rgommers/code/numpy/doc/neps/_build/html/nep-0047-array-api-standard.html#id7)._

Reviewer 2: Sure thing!

Backward compatibility
----------------------

The changes that have a backwards compatibility impact fall into these
categories:

1. Raising errors for consistency/strictness in some places where NumPy now
   allows more flexible behavior,
2. Dtypes of returned arrays for some element-wise functions and reductions,

> 3. Numerical behavior for few tolerance keywords,

Reviewer 2: Not sure but I think a typo?
```suggestion
3. Numerical behavior for a few tolerance keywords,
```

4. Functions moved to ``numpy.linalg`` and supporting stacking/batching.

Raising errors for consistency/strictness includes:

1. Making ``.T`` error for >2 dimensions,
2. Making ``cross`` error on size-2 vectors (only size-3 vectors are supported),
3. Making ``solve`` error on ambiguous input (only accept ``x2`` as vector if ``x2.ndim == 1``),
4. ``outer`` raises rather than flattens on >1-D inputs,

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Author: It looks like there is nothing to do here - things are already behaving this way:
```python
>>> # integer dtypes
>>> x = np.ones((2,2), dtype=np.int32)
>>> x += np.ones((2, 2), dtype=np.int64)
>>> x
array([[2, 2],
       [2, 2]], dtype=int32)
>>> x += np.full((2, 2), 2**34, dtype=np.int64)
>>> x
array([[2, 2],
       [2, 2]], dtype=int32)

>>> # floating-point dtypes
>>> x = np.ones((2,2), dtype=np.float32)
>>> x += np.ones((2, 2), dtype=np.int64)
>>> x
array([[2., 2.],
       [2., 2.]], dtype=float32)
>>> x += np.ones((2, 2), dtype=np.float64)
>>> x
array([[3., 3.],
       [3., 3.]], dtype=float32)
>>> x -= x.mean()
>>> x
array([[0., 0.],
       [0., 0.]], dtype=float32)
>>> x -= x.mean().astype(np.float64)
>>> x
array([[0., 0.],
       [0., 0.]], dtype=float32)
```

I think I took this requirement from https://numpy.org/devdocs/reference/array_api.html#type-promotion-differences, but the example given there seems wrong (I checked also against 1.23.5), there is no upcasting. So, false alarm it looks like - sentence can be removed.

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Author: Now of course there's the opposite issue:
```python
>>> a = np.array(1, dtype=np.int8)
>>> a += np.array(2**12, dtype=np.int16)
>>> a
array(1, dtype=int8)
>>> a + np.array(2**12, dtype=np.int16)
4097
```
It looks like when the right-hand side has a higher-precision dtype, what happens is that it gets cast to the lower-precision dtype silently. Which results in all zeros for values that exceed the max value of the left-hand side dtype. And hence a wrong result. So `x += y` is not equal to `x = x + y` at that point. It would not be strange to completely forbid using a higher-precision dtype on the right-hand side (unrelated to the array API standard though).

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Reviewer 3: What is to do here is to remove the bullet point!  It would be a huge change and those examples would fail *if you would implement it*.

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Author: That's what I said: "sentence can be removed.".

That said, this thread is about in-place operators, _not_ about `sum`/`mean` (that's higher up - you just ). I'd say:
1. nothing to do standard-wise
2. not high-impact probably without the `sum`/`mean` change
3. it may be considered a design issue, it's pretty weird that `-=` is so different from the out-of-place version. That's exactly what you said higher up:

> For the result-cast safety: I like it! But I need assurance that it isn't annoyingly disruptive, because if it is I don't buy it is worth doing it, especially skipping a deprecation needs a better reason IMO.

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Reviewer: I think the array API specification is reasonable here - silent downcasting is very risky, certainly for integers. For the purpose of this NEP, maybe we should punt? It means changing the default casting rule for ufuncs from 'same_kind' to 'safe', which may break a lot of things. Maybe it is something that can be experimented with via some environment variable or so (that controls the default).

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Author: Makes sense - how about I copy the content here into a new issue, and then we can see if it's possible to slowly deprecate?

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Reviewer: Yes, sounds good.

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Author: Ah, looked up the original text, and that clarifies a bit more. There are two requirements:

(1) _An in-place operation must not change the data type or shape of the in-place array as a result of [Type Promotion Rules](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/type_promotion.html#type-promotion) or [Broadcasting](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/broadcasting.html#broadcasting)._

(2) _An in-place operation must have the same behavior (including special cases) as its respective binary (i.e., two operand, non-assignment) operation._

I was mainly thinking about (1) - "do not upcast" works perfectly fine. It's (2) that is the issue here. So yes, we do deviate a bit. I'll add it to the "not adopted" section then. (2) is perfectly reasonable as a requirement indeed, but there's no hurry here it looks like.

> 5. In-place operators are disallowed when the left-hand side would be promoted.

Author: I opened gh-25621 for following up on this topic, and added this requirement to "not adopted" now. Resolving the comment. Thanks for working through it @seberg and @mhvk.

Dtypes of returned arrays for some element-wise functions and reductions
includes functions where dtypes need to be preserved: ``ceil``, ``floor``, and
``trunc`` will start returning arrays with the same integer dtypes if the input
has an integer dtype. It also includes dtype changes: ``sum`` and ``prod``
always upcast lower-precision floating-point dtypes to ``float64`` when
``dtype=None`` (this upcasting is already done for inputs with lower-precision

> integer dtypes). 

Author: Yes, I think this is the one change I wrote down and then intended to revisit, and then forgot about. We haven't implemented it, and I don't think there's a real reason for doing so. I believe this is better to leave untouched indeed, and open an issue on the array API repo that this upcasting is allowed (or recommended), but not mandated.

> integer dtypes). 

Author: I opened https://github.com/data-apis/array-api/issues/731 to reconsider this design choice in the standard. And I added a new section "_Parts of the standard that are not adopted_". That addresses this point I believe.

Changes in numerical behavior include:

- The ``rtol`` default value for ``pinv`` changes from ``1e-15`` to a
  dtype-dependent default value of ``None``, interpreted as ``max(M, N) *
  finfo(result_dtype).eps``,
- The ``tol`` keyword to ``matrix_rank`` changes to ``rtol`` with a different
  interpretation. In addition, ``matrix_rank`` will no longer support 1-D array
  input,
- ``argsort`` and ``sort`` will gain a ``stable`` keyword argument in addition
  to ``kind``, and the default will become ``stable=True``.
- The ``ddof`` keyword in ``std`` and ``var`` changes its name to

>   ``correction``.

Reviewer 3: Do we actually have concrete plans to deprecate it?  IF yes, say that it will be a slow deprecation, as that is important to judge backcompat impact.
I.e. "we plan to deprecate the `ddof` name eventually".

Author: I don't think we have plans to deprecate `ddof`. At least I didn't consider it yet, and I'm not sure it's necessary.

The ``diagonal`` and ``trace`` functions are part of the ``linalg`` submodule
in the standard, rather than the main namespace. Hence they will be introduced
in ``numpy.linalg``. They will operate on the last two rather than first two
axes (for consistency, and to support stacking). Hence the ``linalg`` and main
namespace functions of the same names will differ. This is technically not
breaking, but potentially confusing because of the different behavior for
functions with the same name. We may deprecate ``np.trace`` and ``np.diagonal``
to resolve it, but preferably not immediately to avoid users having to write
``if-2.0-else`` conditional code.

A related note on terminology: "stacking" is a confusing and fairly
NumPy-specific term, this is called "batching" in deep learning frameworks and

> elsewhere - we plan to change the terminology in NumPy to "batching".

Author: Sure, deleted the paragraph and clarified higher up.

There may be other minor changes that don't quite fall in one of the categories
above. For example, ``numpy.fft`` functions need to preserve precision for

> 32-bit input dtypes rather than upcast to ``float64``/``complex128``. And

Author: Removed "minor" (I think it is a fairly minor change and expected behavior, but I don't mind - it's just a word). 

Re the more important part (it's gh-25536): probably by casting? IIRC we need to upgrade from `pocketfft` (C) to `pypocketfft` (C++) for native `float32` support. Which is something we also want to do I believe, but it's not done in gh-25536 as far as I can tell.

> 32-bit input dtypes rather than upcast to ``float64``/``complex128``. And

Reviewer: Indeed, gh-25536 just sets the stage by disentangling pocketfft from the wrapper (so, I *think* it should be a lot easier to use the C++ version), and by making it nearly trivial on the numpy side to support other dtypes.  Anyway, really not very important at all for this NEP!

there's an issue with the ``s``/``axes`` argument in n-D transforms that needs
solving (see `gh-25495 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25495>`__).

> Adapting to the changes

Author: Added `& tooling support` to the section title.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Some part of the Array API has already been implemented as part of the general
> Python API cleanup for NumPy 2.0 (see NEP 52), such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some parts of the array API have already been implemented as part of the general
Python API clean-up for NumPy 2.0 (see NEP 52), such as:
```

- establishing one and way for naming ``inf`` and ``nan`` that is array API
  compatible.

> - removing cryptic dtype names and establishing canonical names for each dtype.

Author: It says that right above, so I'll resolve this comment.

All instructions for migrating to a NEP 52 compatible codebase are available in
the `NumPy 2.0 Migration Guide
<https://numpy.org/devdocs/numpy_2_0_migration_guide.html>`__ . 

Additionally, a new ``ruff`` rule was implemented for an automatic migration of
Python API changes. It's worth pointing out that the new rule NP201 is only to
adhere to the NEP 52 changes, and does not cover using new functions that are
part of the array API standard nor APIs with some types of backwards
incompatible changes discussed above.

> For an automated migration to Array API compatible codebase, a new rule is
> being implemented (see issue `ruff#8615 <https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/8615>`__
> and PR `ruff#8910 <https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/8910>`__).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an automated migration to an array API compatible codebase, a new rule is
being implemented (see issue `ruff#8615 <https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/8615>`__
and PR `ruff#8910 <https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/8910>`__).
```

> With both rules in place a downstream user should be able to update their
> project, to the extent that that is possible with automation, to a library
> agnostic codebase that can benefit from different array libraries and devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With both rules in place a downstream user should be able to update their
project, to the extent that is possible with automation, to a library
agnostic codebase that can benefit from different array libraries and devices.
```

> Backwards incompatible changes that cannot be handled automatically (e.g., a
> change in ``rtol`` defaults for a linear algebra function), this will be
> handled the same way as any other backwards incompatible change in NumPy 2.0 -
> through documentation, release notes, and API migrations and deprecations over
> several releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Backwards incompatible changes that cannot be handled automatically (e.g., a
change in ``rtol`` defaults for a linear algebra function) will be handled
in the same way as any other backwards incompatible change in NumPy 2.0 -
through documentation, release notes, API migrations and deprecations over
several releases.
```

Detailed description
--------------------

> In this section we'll focus on specific API additions and functionality that we
> would not consider introducing into NumPy if the standard would not exist and
> we wouldn't have to think/worry about its main goal of writing code that is
> portable across multiple array libraries and their supported features like GPUs
> and other hardware accelerators or JIT compilers.

Reviewer 2: This is quite a long sentence to have no punctuation - a suggestion but whatever you think reads best :)
```suggestion
In this section, we'll focus on specific API additions and functionality that we
would not consider introducing into NumPy if the standard did not exist and
we didn't have to think/worry about its main goal: writing code that is
portable across multiple array libraries and their supported features like GPUs
and other hardware accelerators or JIT compilers.
```

is ``np.issubdtype``, however that assumes a complex class hierarchy which
other array libraries don't have, isn't the most ergonomic API, and required a
larger API surface (``np.floating`` and friends). ``isdtype`` will be the new
and canonical way to introspect dtypes. All it requires from a dtype is that
``_eq__`` is implemented and has the expected behavior when compared with other
dtypes from the same library.

Note that as part of the effort on NEP 52, some dtype aliases were removed and
canonical Python and C names documented. See also `gh-17325
<https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/17325>`__ covering issues with NumPy's
lack of a good API for this.

``copy`` keyword semantics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``copy`` keyword in ``asarray`` and ``array`` will now support
``True``/``False``/``None`` with new meanings:

- ``True`` - Always make a copy.
- ``False`` - Never make a copy. If a copy is required a ``ValueError`` is raised.
- ``None`` - A copy will only be made if it is necessary (previously ``False``).

The ``copy`` keyword in ``astype`` will stick to its current meaning, because
"never copy" when asking for a cast to a different dtype doesn't quite make

> sense.

Reviewer 4: xref https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25168#issuecomment-1857878408

It would be nice to get a little bit more discussion about how downstream should adapt to this change. Just replace `np.array(..., copy=False)` with `np.asarray()`? If so, do we communicate that in the `ValueError` that gets generated?

Reviewer 3: Yes, this is a at least almost a large impact change:  It should have its own sub section in the backwards compatibility section.  (It is currently completely missing there).

Author: I assume you're commenting on `asarray`, not `astype`. I'd say the migration guide should say: do nothing (because that's more likely than not what the author intended - remember we have a semantic ambiguity here right now), and if you get an exception, inspect the code and if you indeed intended "only if needed", change it to `copy=None`.

I also don't think it's a large change. The default is do nothing, and in some cases the exception message will then tell you what to change.

Reviewer 3: That is fair, although I still think it would be good to explicitly mention the BC change of having to replace `array(..., copy=False)` with `asarray(...)`.  You can point out that it isn't super common because `asarray()` makes more sense and that the it is turns into an easy to fix error.

I am actually not convinced that it's more likely than not what the author intended (unless you found that by code search).  Many cases are probably just better served by `asarray()` but tried to micro-optimize it away because it had extra overhead until a few years ago.
Also there is the caveat that if we go e.g. via `__array__()`, `copy=False` will fail even when it shouldn't conceptually.

Reviewer: I've used `np.array(..., copy=False, subok=True)` quite a lot, when indeed it was faster than `np.asanyarray`; I don't think I have ever had a cases where I'd want an error if the input was not an array...

That said, I agree with the logic of `False/True/None` and don't mind to change my code/astropy (though I wish `copy=None` was backward compatible).

Reviewer: > Also there is the caveat that if we go e.g. via `__array__()`, `copy=False` will fail even when it shouldn't conceptually.

This is more problematic, indeed.

Author: Quick comments while I'm sorting through the text and gh-25168:
1. there's a bit of a circular thing going on here, where most of the problem seems to be `array` (a non-recommended / don't care function), and the only reason we even want to update `array` is for consistency with `asarray` (the important function here)
2. I'm not 100% sure I understand the `__array__` comment. I haven't thought about that one much before, but I think you mean something here like *"we cannot know if a call to `__array__` is going to cause this non-numpy object to copy data, so we must not call `__array__` if `copy=False`"?* If so, I'm not sure that's necessarily a long-term problem; a logical solution would be to add `copy=None` keyword to `__array__` so that we can know. If numpy cannot know it preferably shouldn't be guessing.

New function name aliases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In the Python API cleanup for NumPy 2.0 (see :ref:`NEP52`) we spent a lot of
effort removing aliases. So introducing new aliases has to have a good
rationale. In this case, it is needed in order to match other libraries.
The main set of aliases added is for trigonometric functions, where
the array API standard chose to follow C99 and other libraries in using

> ``acos``, ``asin`` etc. rather than ``arccos``, ``arcsin``, etc. NumPy usually
> also follows C99; it is not entirely clear why this naming choice was made many
> years ago.

Reviewer 2: minor
```suggestion
``acos``, ``asin`` etc. rather than ``arccos``, ``arcsin``, etc. NumPy also
usually follows C99; it is not entirely clear why this naming choice was made many
years ago.
```

> years ago.

Author: Sure. If I counted correctly, it's 13 aliases in the main namespace and 2 in `numpy.linalg` (xref gh-25086).

> years ago.

Author: done in commit 90df451356

New keywords with overlapping semantics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similarly to function name aliases, there are a couple of new keywords which
have overlap with existing ones:

- ``correction`` keyword for ``std`` and ``var`` (overlaps with ``ddof``)
- ``stable`` keyword for ``sort`` and ``argsort`` (overlaps with ``kind``)

The ``correction`` name is for clarity ("delta degrees of freedom" is not easy
to understand) and ``stable`` is complementary to ``kind``, allowing a library
to reserve the right to change/improve the stable and unstable sorting

> algorithms.

Author: adopting that suggestion

New ``unique_*`` functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``unique`` function, with ``return_index``, ``return_inverse``, and
``return_counts`` arguments that influence the cardinality of the returned

> tuple, is replaced in the Array API by four respective functions:

Reviewer 2: for consistency
```suggestion
tuple, is replaced in the array API by four respective functions:
```

``unique_all``, ``unique_counts``, ``unique_inverse``, and ``unique_values``.
This new API helps to better anticipate the return object and support clearer

> typing.

Author: No, static typing has problems with this too. If you look at the many overloads for `unique`, you'll see that they only work for `Literal[True]`/`Literal[False]`, anything else will not work for Mypy & co.

Adopting your suggestion to mention tools like Numba (and Mypy).

``np.bool`` addition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One of the aliases that used to live in NumPy but got removed was ``np.bool``.

> To comply with the Array API it got reintroduced with a different meaning, as

Reviewer 2: for consistency
```suggestion
To comply with the array API it got reintroduced with a different meaning, as
```

> One of the aliases that used to live in NumPy but got removed was ``np.bool``.
> To comply with the Array API it got reintroduced with a different meaning, as

Reviewer 2: grammar nit, feel free to ignore
```suggestion
One of the aliases that used to live in NumPy but was removed is ``np.bool``.
To comply with the Array API it was reintroduced with a different meaning, as
```

now it points to NumPy's bool instead of a Python builtin. This change is a
good idea and we were planning to make it anyway, because ``bool`` is a nicer

> name than ``bool_``. However, we may not have scheduled that reintroduction of
> the name for 2.0 perhaps if it had not been part of the array API standard.

Reviewer 2: nit: no need for both 'may' and 'perhaps'
```suggestion
name than ``bool_``. However, we may not have scheduled that reintroduction of
the name for 2.0 if it had not been part of the array API standard.
```

  labeled with *Array API*.
- SciPy `docs on array API support <http://scipy.github.io/devdocs/dev/api-dev/array_api.html>`__
  and `PRs <https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3A%22array+types%22>`__
  and `issues <https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22array+types%22>`__ labeled with *array types*.
- Einops `docs on supported frameworks <https://einops.rocks/#supported-frameworks>`__
  and `PR to implement array API standard support <https://github.com/arogozhnikov/einops/pull/261>`__.

Other array libraries either already have support or are implementing support
for the array API standard (in sync with the changes for NumPy 2.0, since they
usually try to be as compatible to NumPy as possible). For example:

- CuPy's `docs on array API support <https://docs.cupy.dev/en/stable/reference/array_api.html>`__
  and `PRs labelled with array-api <https://github.com/cupy/cupy/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3Aarray-api>`__.
- JAX: enhancement proposal `Scope of JAX NumPy & SciPy Wrappers <https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/jep/18137-numpy-scipy-scope.html#axis-2-array-api-alignment>`__

>   and `PR with initial implementation <https://github.com/google/jax/pull/16099>`__.

Reviewer 5: A more up-to-date reference is JAX's tracking issue for array API support: https://github.com/google/jax/issues/18353

Implementation
--------------

The tracking issue for Array API standard support
(`gh-25076  <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/25076>`__)
records progress of implementing full support and links to related discussions.
It lists all relevant PRs (merged and pending) that verify or provide array API
support.

As NEP 52 blends to some degree with this NEP, we can find some relevant implementations
and discussion also on its tracking issue (`gh-23999 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/issues/23999>`__).

The PR that was merged as one of the first contained a new CI job that adds the
`array-api-tests <https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-tests>`__ test suite.

> This way we had a better control over which batch of functions/aliases is being
> added each time, and be sure that the implementation conforms with the Array
> API standard (see `gh-25167 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25167>`__).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This way we had better control over which batch of functions/aliases were being
added each time, and could be sure that the implementations conformed to the array
API standard (see `gh-25167 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25167>`__).
```

Then, we continued to merge one batch at the time, adding a specific API
section. Below we list some of the more substantial ones, including some that
we discussed in the previous sections of this NEP:

- `gh-25167: MAINT: Add array-api-tests CI stage, add ndarray.__array_namespace__ <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25167>`__.
- `gh-25088: API: Add Array API setops [Array API] <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25088>`__
- `gh-25155: API: Add matrix_norm, vector_norm, vecdot and matrix_transpose [Array API] <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25155>`__
- `gh-25080: API: Add and redefine numpy.bool [Array API] <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25080>`__
- `gh-25054: API: Introduce np.isdtype function [Array API] <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25054>`__
- `gh-25168: API: Introduce copy argument for np.asarray [Array API] <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25168>`__

Alternatives
------------

The alternatives to implementing support for the array API standard in NumPy's
main namespace include:

- one or more of the superseded NEPs, or
- making ``ndarray.__array_namespace__()`` return a hidden namespace with

>   compatible functions,

Author: Okay, tweaking text to add "(or even another new public namespace)"

>   compatible functions,

Author: done in commit 90df451356

- not implementing support for the array API standard at all.

The superseded NEPs all have some drawbacks compared to the array API standard,
and by now a lot of work has gone into the standard - as well as adoption by
other key libraries. So those alternatives are not appealing. Given the amount
of interest in this topic, doing nothing also is not appealing. The "hidden
namespace" option would be a smaller change to this proposal. We prefer not to

> do that since it leads to duplicate implementations staying around, a more

Author: It's not impossible we may need it in the future, but it's not at all clear that we would ever need it. Versioning isn't needed as long as the added API surface and semantics in newer versions of the standard are a superset. Which should be true for the next version at least, and we should try hard to keep it that way. `special` extension isn't a given yet (it could be rejected, and certainly it isn't close to the finish line yet), and otherwise could probably be handled fairly easily in a module-level `__getattr__`.

complex implementation (e.g., potential issues with static typing), and still
having two flavors of essentially the same API.

An alternative to removing ``numpy.array_api`` from NumPy is to keep it in its
current place, since it is still useful - it is the best way to test if
downstream code is actually portable between array libraries. This is a very
reasonable alternative, however there is a slight preference for taking that

> module and turning it into a standalone package.

Author: The whole module is useful for portability testing, and leaving it in is an equally valid choice. So I think this is worth two sentences. It's unrelated to the separate array object.

> module and turning it into a standalone package.

Author: Well it's in the code base and it's used by at least SciPy and scikit-learn, so pretending it never existed at all isn't too helpful I think. It was in with an experimental label, and now we actually have to take action to remove it and deal with the impact of that removal downstream, so I want to describe it as such.

and hence nice to have anyway), allowing a library to reserve the right to
change/improve the stable and unstable sorting algorithms.

New ``unique_*`` functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``unique`` function, with ``return_index``, ``return_inverse``, and
``return_counts`` arguments that influence the cardinality of the returned
tuple, is replaced in the array API by four respective functions:
``unique_all``, ``unique_counts``, ``unique_inverse``, and ``unique_values``.
These new functions avoid polymorphism, which tends to be a problem for JIT
compilers and static typing. Use of these functions therefore helps tools like
Numba as well as users of static type checkers like Mypy.

``np.bool`` addition
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

One of the aliases that used to live in NumPy but was removed is ``np.bool``.
To comply with the array API it was reintroduced with a different meaning, as
now it points to NumPy's bool instead of a Python builtin. This change is a
good idea and we were planning to make it anyway, because ``bool`` is a nicer
name than ``bool_``. However, we may not have scheduled that reintroduction of
the name for 2.0 if it had not been part of the array API standard.

> Parts of the standard that are not adopted

Reviewer: Thanks, very helpful!

------------------------------------------

There are a couple of things that the standard prescribes which we propose *not*
to follow (at least at this time). These are:

1. The requirement that an indexing operation must result in an array of the

>    same dtype of the indexed array.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for this section, but not sure where this point comes from?  Sure it returns a different type, but not dtype.
(You "lose" the byte-order storage detail and metadata, but I am sure you don't care about either.)

You can mention that the array-api prefers to not have scalars in some form I guess, for the second part, maybe for that it makes sense to use indexing as an example (it isn't the only place, especially right now).

preferably not immediately to avoid users having to write ``if-2.0-else``
conditional code.

*We expect the impact of this category of changes to be small.*

**The semantics of the copy keyword in asarray and array** for
``copy=False`` will change from "copy if needed" to "never copy". there are now
three types of behavior rather than two - ``copy=None`` means "copy if needed".

*We expect the impact of this category of changes to be medium. In case users get
an exception because they use* ``copy=False`` *explicitly in their copy but a
copy was previously made anyway, they have to inspect their code and determine
whether the intent of the code was the old or the new semantics (both seem
rougly equally likely), and adapt the code as appropriate. We expect most cases
to be* ``np.array(..., copy=False)``, *because until a few years ago that had
lower overhead than* ``np.asarray(...)``. *This was solved though, and*
``np.asarray(...)`` *is idiomatic NumPy usage.*

> **Other changes**: there may be a few other changes that don't quite fall in

Reviewer: This has now happened - gh-25711

one of the categories above. For example, ``numpy.fft`` functions need to
preserve precision for 32-bit input dtypes rather than upcast to
``float64``/``complex128`` (desirable anyway, and can be supported with the new
gufunc implementation in (`gh-25336
<https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25336>`__) . Also in ``numpy.fft``,
there's an issue with the ``s``/``axes`` argument in n-D transforms that needs

> solving (see `gh-25495 <https://github.com/numpy/numpy/pull/25495>`__).

Reviewer: gh-25495 has also been merged.

Author: Yes, great that these have been merged. I'm not sure that should change the text here though? Ideally it reads okay whether or not linked PRs have been merged or not.

Reviewer: It just seemed the text would read more easily if adjusted. (and the first link points to an unrelated PR...)

Author: Okay, you are right. I rewrote this section now and make it explicitly about `numpy.fft` rather than putting it under "other changes".
